DOC1819: [Partner ops] P3 card disputes chargebacks guide (#677)
swan-io/docs: docs/topics/operations/guide-card-disputes-chargebacks.mdx

---
title: Card disputes and chargebacks
description: How to support your users through card disputes and chargebacks, including what evidence to collect and what to expect.
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# Card disputes and chargebacks

```

> This guide helps partner support teams support your users through card disputes and chargebacks, including what evidence to collect and what to expect. It covers fraud disputes and ATM withdrawal cases for all Swan card types: virtual, physical, and digital. Swan doesn't currently process chargebacks for other commercial dispute types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide helps you support your users through card disputes and chargebacks, including what evidence to collect and what to expect. It covers fraud disputes and ATM withdrawal cases for all Swan card types: virtual, physical, and digital. Swan doesn't currently process chargebacks for other commercial dispute types.
```

Author: We're adding "partner support team" in the intro of these at the start, so it's clear from the get-go who the audience is.

> For card transactions outside the SEPA area, the disputed amount is the euro equivalent converted at Mastercard's exchange rate, as shown on the account statement. The dispute process is the same. For card transaction statuses and rejection codes, see [Card payments](/topics/merchants/in-person/cards/). For insurance coverage, see [Card packages](/topics/cards/card-packages/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For card transactions outside the SEPA area, the disputed amount is the euro equivalent converted at Mastercard's exchange rate, as shown on the account statement. The dispute process is the same. For card transaction statuses and rejection codes, see [Card payments](/topics/payments/cards/#statuses). For insurance coverage, see [Card packages](/topics/cards/card-packages/).
```

:::info Key takeaways
- Fraud disputes require a **signed fraudulent usage declaration**. A police report is strongly recommended.
- Chargebacks for ATM withdrawal disputes take between **50 and 90 calendar days**.
- The number one cause of delays is **incomplete evidence** at initial submission.
- Swan processes chargebacks for **fraud disputes** and **ATM withdrawal** cases only. Your users need to resolve all other commercial disputes directly with the merchant.

> - A fee of up to **€50** may apply to fraud refunds, under the General Terms and Conditions (T&C's).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A fee of up to **€50** may apply to fraud refunds, under the General Terms and Conditions (T&Cs).
```

:::

## Choose the right dispute path

Before collecting evidence, identify your user's role in the dispute.

- **Your user is the cardholder disputing an amount:** Follow the cardholder dispute process in this guide. Swan reviews the case, determines whether it's eligible for a chargeback, and refunds confirmed fraudulent transactions according to the rules that apply.
- **Your user is a merchant, and Swan received a chargeback request through Mastercard:** [Submit a Swan Support request](https://partner-support.swan.io/hc/en-gb/requests/new). Include the chargeback reference number and any documentation received from Mastercard.

:::caution Two separate processes
Don't use the cardholder fraud reimbursement process for merchant-side chargeback requests. These are separate paths with different evidence requirements, timelines, and outcomes.
:::

> **Pre-authorization holds** such as hotel, Airbnb, or rental deposits that appear as `Pending` aren't disputes. They release automatically when the merchant closes the authorization or after a set period. If your user has a hold that hasn't been released and the transaction now shows as `Booked`, submit a [Swan Support request](https://partner-support.swan.io/hc/en-gb/requests/new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pre-authorization holds** such as hotel, vacation rental, or car rental deposits that appear as `Pending` aren't disputes. They release automatically when the merchant closes the authorization or after a set period. If your user has a hold that hasn't been released and the transaction now shows as `Booked`, submit a [Swan Support request](https://partner-support.swan.io/hc/en-gb/requests/new).
```

| Required evidence | Details |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Police report** | Filed with local authorities. Strongly recommended for all fraud claims. In France, your user can submit the official Perceval online fraud declaration as an alternative to a police report, or in addition to one. |
| **Signed fraudulent usage declaration** | Swan provides this form. Your user signs it to declare they didn't authorize the transactions. Direct your user to the [support article](https://support.swan.io/hc/en-150/articles/17099978406045) for the PDF in English and French. |
| **Government online fraud declaration** (if applicable) | For online fraud where your user still has their card, Swan may also ask them to complete the official government fraud declaration form and send the receipt. This is separate from the Swan form. Swan requests it during the investigation if it applies — your user doesn't need to submit it proactively. |
| **Transaction details** | Date, amount, and merchant name for each disputed transaction |
| **Screenshots** (optional) | From the banking app or account statement showing the disputed transactions |

:::caution Fee on fraud refunds

> A fee of up to **€50** may apply to fraud refunds, under the T&C's. Swan tells your user whether it applies once the case is fully analyzed. Don't promise a full refund before Swan confirms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fee of up to **€50** may apply to fraud refunds, under the T&Cs. Swan tells your user whether it applies once the case is fully analyzed. Don't promise a full refund before Swan confirms.
```

:::

:::info 3DS-authenticated transactions

> In your support request, include whether the disputed transactions used 3DS authentication. When a transaction was completed with 3DS consent, the cardholder authenticated the payment at the time. This raises the question around whether the transaction is considered unauthorized, and Swan may need additional evidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your support request, include whether the disputed transactions used 3DS authentication. When a transaction was completed with 3DS consent, the cardholder authenticated the payment at the time. This raises the question of whether the transaction was unauthorized, and Swan may need additional evidence.
```

:::

The card needs to be permanently canceled, not just suspended. This prevents further unauthorized use, and Swan can't process the dispute until this is completed. Your user will need a replacement card.

Direct your user to cancel the card themselves: see [Block your card](https://support.swan.io/hc/en-150/articles/18538920070045) on support.swan.io. If your product doesn't yet offer card cancellation in-app, ask your development team to add this capability using Swan's [Cards API](/topics/cards/). If your user can't cancel the card and it needs blocking immediately, submit a Swan Support request.

If your user has multiple disputed transactions on the same card, include all of them in a single support request.

## Collect evidence for an ATM withdrawal dispute

> Evidence requirements depend on the scenario. For ATM withdrawal disputes above €50, collect the required documents and submit a Swan Support request. For all other scenarios, the table below shows what evidence your user needs to gather when they contact the merchant directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Collect evidence for other dispute scenarios

Evidence requirements depend on the scenario. For ATM withdrawal disputes above €50, collect the required documents and submit a Swan Support request. For all other scenarios, the table below shows what evidence your user needs to gather when they contact the merchant directly.
```
Section titled "Collect evidence for an ATM withdrawal dispute" but the table is mostly commercial scenarios

(Linked to next comment)

Author: Updated

:::caution Prerequisite for commercial disputes

> For the commercial dispute scenarios in this table, your user needs to have tried resolving the issue with the merchant for **at least 3 weeks** before a chargeback request can be submitted, and you need evidence of that contact. This doesn't apply to fraud disputes or ATM withdrawal chargebacks.

Reviewer: Caution says commercial disputes need 3 weeks of merchant contact "before a chargeback request can be submitted". Contradicts R6, R14, and R54, which all state Swan files chargebacks for fraud and ATM only. Either Swan does accept commercial chargeback requests in some cases (then the eligibility statements need softening), or this caution shouldn't mention chargeback submission.

Author: Have updated this whole section so it's more clear.

:::

| Scenario | What your user claims | Required evidence |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Product or service not received** | Paid but never received. | Invoice or proof of purchase, delivery or shipping details with expected date, emails or screenshots showing contact with the merchant. |
| **Product damaged, defective, or not as described** | Product arrived but is wrong or damaged. | Invoice or proof of purchase, photos of the damaged goods. |
| **Unrecognized charge** | Doesn't recognize the charge. | No documents required. If available, include evidence of contact with the merchant. |
| **ATM withdrawal not received** | Didn't receive funds during an ATM withdrawal. Swan only processes ATM chargebacks for amounts above €50. | No documents required. |
| **Duplicate charge** | Charged multiple times for the same purchase. | Invoice or proof of purchase, evidence of contact with the merchant. |
| **Wrong amount charged** | Amount debited doesn't match the invoice. | Invoice or proof of purchase, evidence of contact with the merchant. |

> | **Refund not credited** | Merchant confirmed a refund, but it hasn't appeared .| Invoice or proof of purchase, emails where the merchant confirmed the refund and amount. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Refund not credited** | Merchant confirmed a refund, but it hasn't appeared. | Invoice or proof of purchase, emails where the merchant confirmed the refund and amount. |
```

:::tip Canceled orders, reservations, and subscriptions
If your user canceled an order, booking, or subscription and hasn't received a refund, use one of these two scenarios:

- **Refund not credited**: the merchant confirmed the cancellation and refund in writing.
- **Product or service not received**: no cancellation confirmation exists.

Collect evidence of the cancellation alongside the standard evidence for that scenario.
:::

## Understand expected timelines

These timelines apply when a chargeback is filed. Not all disputes result in a chargeback.

:::caution Filing deadline
Your user's deadline to dispute a transaction depends on how they use the card:

- **Personal transactions**: **13 months** from the debit date.
- **Professional transactions**: **8 weeks** from the debit date.

Disputes submitted after this window aren't eligible for a chargeback under card network rules.
:::

:::caution ATM withdrawal chargeback timelines

> Chargebacks for ATM withdrawal disputes may take between **50 and 90 calendar days**. The timeline for these differ to card fraud disputes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chargebacks for ATM withdrawal disputes may take between **50 and 90 calendar days**. This timeline differs from card fraud disputes.
```
